*Log In*
To Log In to this CLEA exercise:

    1) Select "File"->"Login" from the main menu.  The login dialog will
    appear.

    2) Enter the appropriate name(s) in the fields provided.

    3) The laboratory table number may already be set.  If it is not, or
    is incorrect, enter the correct table number.

    4) Press "OK".  The selections on the file menu that control the
    exercise will be activated, while the "Login..." selection will be
    deactivated. (You cannot return to the login dialog after you have
    completed it.)

The information entered on the login dialog is used to generate names
for data files, and will appear on data and printouts that are produced
by the exercise.  If you have entered no information, a box will warn
you of this when you press "OK". If you then select "Cancel" on the
warning box, you will return to the login dialog. If you select "OK" on
the warning box, the program will continue without a login name, in
which case generated data and files will be identified as "NoLog".

*Set Image File Type*
Select "File"->"Set Image File Type..." from the main menu to set the
image file type.  Select the file format from the list of supported 
types. Note that the ST-4 file type is separated from the other SBIG 
file types (ST-4X, ST-5, -6, -7, -8, -9, STV, PixCel).  This form also 
contains a box where you can specify how the time parameter carried in 
the file header relates to the start time of the exposure.  This 
selection defaults to the start of the exposure for FITS and SBIG 
files.  (These defaults may be changed via "File"->"Preferences...".)
This selection is disabled for ST-4 files, since no time parameter is 
carried in the file.

*Load Image Files*
Image files are loaded by selecting "File"->"Load"->"Image #" from the
main menu.  A maximum of four images can be loaded at any time.  When
you attempt to load a new image over an existing one you will be asked
to confirm that this is what you wish to do.  The "Multiple Load"
selection allows you to specify up to four images for loading at the 
same time (hold down the "Ctrl" button while selecting the images).
Note that files selected under "Multiple Load" may not load in the
order specified, which will affect the blinking order.  If this happens 
you can change the blinking order during the blink setup (see "Blinking
Procedure").

You should set the file type (see "Set Image File Type") before loading
the first image, and before loading an image of a different file type.
If the coordinates of a new image are significantly different, or
contain a new target object, you should specify a new field before
loading it (see "Clear Current Images and/or Reference Fields").

*Clear Current Images and/or Reference Fields*
You should clear the current settings before loading new images if the
new field centers are significantly different (for example, enough to
invalidate the current selection of reference stars), or the new image
relates to a different target object.  To change the target object,
select "File"->"Clear Images/Ref. Fields"->"Images and Reference Fields"
from the main menu.  For a new field but the same target, select
"File"->"Clear Images/Ref. Fields"-> "Reference Fields Only" (you can
also do this during processing if you wish to invalidate an image
measurement operation and redo it).  Both operations clear the reference
star field and parameters.  The software will ask for verification
before performing the clear/reset operations.

*Display Loaded Images*
To display a loaded image, select "Images"->"View/Adjust..." from the
main menu, then select the image number(s) from the small form that
appears.  From the image display window you can make adjustments to the
image, view and print the image header and display information, and
print the image itself.  See the individual help topics for more
information.

*Change Display Size*
Images wider than 1/2 the screen-width are scaled initially by the
software so that two complete images can be displayed side by side. The
magnification of the displayed image (relative to the image file)
appears at the upper left-hand corner.  You can change the size of a
displayed image as follows: Place the cursor over any part of the
displayed image and press the RIGHT mouse button, then select "Resize
Image..." from the pop-up menu that appears.  Set the desired size via
the form that appears.  Note that you cannot make an image larger than
its original (file) size in pixels using this technique. (See the Help
topic "Zoom/Unzoom an Image".)

*Zoom/Unzoom an Image*
You can zoom (magnify) a selected portion of an image as follows: Place
the cursor over any part of the displayed image and press the RIGHT
mouse button, then select "Zoom Image..." from the pop-up menu that
appears.  (You can alternatively select "Image"->"Zoom" from the menu on
the image display window.)  The appearance of the cursor will change.
Place the cursor at the upper-left corner of the region you wish to
magnify, then press and hold the RIGHT mouse button while dragging the
cursor downward and/or to the right to outline the zoom region.  Release
the mouse button when the region is the desired size. (Note that the
zoom region will always be square.)  You can reposition the zoom region
simply by repeating the process from a different starting point.  The
magnification (based on the image file, not the displayed image) appears
at the upper left of the zoom region.  Once you have outlined the zoom
region, double-click the LEFT mouse button over any part of the image to
zoom.  To return to the unzoomed display, double-click again over any
part of the zoomed image.  To clear the zoom region, select "Image"->
"Clear Zoom" from the display menu.  The cursor will return to its
normal appearance.

*Adjust Brightness, Contrast*
To adjust image brightness and contrast, place the cursor anywhere on
the displayed image and press the RIGHT mouse button.  Select "Adjust
Image..." from the pop-up menu and vary the image display using the
sliders provided.

To apply the same settings to other images, check "Use Settings as
Defaults" and press "OK" to exit the form.  Any images you load after
doing this will automatically have their contrast and brightness
adjusted to the settings you have selected.  To apply the new default
settings to a image that is already loaded, display it and select
"Adjust Image..." as described above, then press the button labeled
"Restore Default Settings".  Note that you can always return to the
original display (brightness and contrast settings at 0.0) by pressing
"Restore Original Display".  (Also see the Help topic "Initial
Background Level and Display Range".)

Note that this software does not provide for re-writing an adjusted
image to a file.  (There are many software packages available that do
this, usually providing a large selection of output formats.)

*Change Image Orientation*
To change the image orientation, place the cursor anywhere on the
displayed image and press the RIGHT mouse button.  Select "Adjust
Image..." from the pop-up menu and click on the appropriate orientation
arrow(s).  The image display will not change orientation until you press
"OK", but indicators will appear to show which change(s) you have
selected.

*Invert Display*
You can invert image displays to show a "negative" image (black on white
vs. white on black).  Place the cursor anywhere on the displayed image
and press the RIGHT mouse button.  Select "Adjust Image..." from the
pop-up menu and click on the box labeled "Invert Display" (a check mark
will appear). The display will not appear inverted until you press "OK".
To return to a "positive" display, click the "Invert Display" box again
so that the check mark disappears.

*Initial Background Level & Display Range*
When image files are loaded, the software performs a statistical
analysis of the raw pixel values and uses these measures to establish
the initial background level and display range for the image.  This
process attempts to maximize the visibility of fainter stars against the
background, which can result in decreased visibility of extended sources
(nebulae).  Information about the pixel values and the adjusted image
range is available from the image display window.  Select "Image"->
"Information"->"Image..." from the menu.

For SBIG files (other than ST-4) the image header contains the
background and range used to display the image when it was last saved.
You can instruct the software to use either these values or the
statistically derived ones described above.  Place the cursor anywhere
on the displayed image and press the RIGHT mouse button.  Select "Adjust
Image..." from the pop-up menu, and make your selection in the box
labeled "Bkgrnd, Range".  (This selection is not available for FITS or
ST-4 files.)

Once an image is loaded, brightness and contrast can be adjusted - see
the Help topic "Adjust Brightness, Contrast".

*Display/Print Header & Display Information*
Image file header information is available for display and printing.
From the image display window, select "Image"->"Information"->"File
Header...".  To display information on the pixel values and adjusted
background and display range (see the Help topic "Initial Background
Level & Display Range"), select "Image"->"Information"->"Image...".

Any displayed list or report can be printed and/or saved as text, and
can be searched for matches to a user-supplied text string.  Select the
desired action under "List" on the text display window.

*Print Images*
To print an image, select "Image"->"Print Image..." from the menu on the
image display window.  You may want to try printing both a "positive"
and a "negative" image (see the Help topic "Invert Display") to see
which is more satisfactory.

*Blinking Procedure*
Image blinking is used to detect moving objects and objects that vary in
brightness.  The following procedure outlines the technique (items in
parentheses are references to relevant Help topics):

    1)  Load at least two images of the same field ("Load Image Files").

    2)  Display the images ("Display Loaded Images"), and, to the degree
    possible, adjust brightness and contrast so that image visibility
    and background level are the same on all ("Adjust Brightness,
    Contrast").

    3)  Select "Images"->"Blink" from the main menu.

    4)  The first image will appear, and you will be asked to select two
    alignment stars.  You should select two well-exposed stars that
    appear on all images, and are well separated in both dimensions
    (stars near diagonally opposite corners are ideal).

    5)  When you finish selecting the stars on the 1st image, you will
    be asked to locate them on the 2nd image.  The display will help you
    by marking where the 1st star is on the 1st image. After you locate
    it on the 2nd image, the display will mark where the 2nd star should
    be based on your positioning of the 1st.  If it is correct you can
    press "Continue" without marking the 2nd star.  This process will
    continue until the alignment stars have been located on all images.

    6)  If the indicated position of the 2nd star is incorrect by more
    than a small amount, you have probably made an error in finding the
    1st star on the image.  Press "Cancel" on the instruction box and
    restart the alignment process ("Blink Adjustments").

    7)  When you finish identifying the alignment stars on all images, a
    small form will appear allowing you to set the blinking order (if,
    for example, you did not load the images in the correct order).
    When you are satisfied with the blink order, press "OK" then select
    "Blink" on the blink window menu to start the blinking process.
    Blinking ceases when you select "Stop" on the same menu.  You may
    then modify and/or restart the blinking process ("Blink
    Adjustments").

    8) When you have found the target (moving) object, stop the
    blinking.  If you wish, you can now identify the target on each
    image for measurement.  Select "Identify Target" on the blink window
    menu and follow the prompts.  If you choose not to identify the
    target at this time you can do it later during the measurement
    process.

    9)  If the entire display appears to be jumping back and forth
    during blinking, you have either miss-identified one or both
    alignment stars on one or more images or you have selected a moving
    object as an alignment star.  Stop the blinking and see the Help
    topic "Blink Adjustments".

*Blink Adjustments*
You can interrupt the blinking process at any point (when the blinking
is stopped) by pressing "Cancel" on the instruction box.  When the
instruction box disappears, select "Adjust" on the blink window menu or
press the RIGHT mouse button with the cursor anywhere over the image.
Selections will appear allowing you to reselect the alignment stars,
change the blink order and blink rate, select and blink a magnified
sub-region (see "Blink a Sub-region"), and adjust the image displays

*Blink a Sub-Region*
To blink a magnified sub-region of the full image, select "Set Blink
Region (Zoom)..." under "Adjust" on the blink window menu, or on the
pop-up that appears when you press the RIGHT mouse button over the
image. The appearance of the cursor will change.  Position the cursor at
the upper left corner of the region you wish to magnify, then press and
hold the RIGHT mouse button while dragging the cursor downward and/or to
the right to outline the zoom region.  Release the mouse button when the
region is the desired size.  (Note that the zoom region will always be
square.)  You can reposition the zoom region simply by repeating the
process from a different starting point.  The magnification (based on
the image file, not the displayed image) appears at the upper left of
the zoom region.  When you have outlined the region you wish to blink,
press "Blink" on the menu and the selected region of each image will be
shown magnified in the blink window.  When "Stop" is pressed, the image
will again be shown full size, but the blink region will be outlined
(and can be repositioned).  To return to blinking the full image, select
"Adjust"->"Blink Full Image (Unzoom)..." and the blink region outline
will disappear.

*Measure Images*
To begin measuring a loaded image, select "Images"->"Measure"->"Image #"
from the main menu.  The first item that appears is the Observation
Parameters form, which is used to enter the object identification and
observation date and time.  The software will fill in the date and time
with information from the file header.  For FITS files, the software may
also fill in the object name from the file header.

If you have not already loaded a reference star field, or have cleared
it (see the Help topic "Clear Current Images and/or Reference Fields"),
the Field Parameters form will appear.  Enter the field center
coordinates, field size, and magnitude limit for the reference stars in
the indicated boxes.  If you have specified the USNO SA1.0 or SA2.0 as a
supplementary catalog to the GSC, you can choose whether or not to
include it on this form.  For the USNO catalogs, you can also choose
which magnitudes to use.  For best results, set the magnitude limit to a
value close to your actual limiting magnitude, perhaps 1/2 magnitude
fainter.

Once you have specified the reference field parameters, the catalog(s) 
will be searched for reference stars, and the reference star window 
will be displayed alongside the image window.  A small form box will 
appear on the screen which will guide you through the measurement 
process; follow its instructions.  The main steps in this process are 
as follows:

    1)  Select a suitable number of reference stars on the reference
    field display.  The minimum number required depends on the
    mathematical model chosen for the solution (see the Help topic
    "Mathematical Solution Models").  You should always use more than
    the minimum required.  Note that stars can be selected separately as
    position and/or magnitude references.  (See the Help topic
    "Magnitudes".)

    2)  Identify these same stars on the image display.  The software
    will assist you after the first three are identified.

    3)  Identify the unknown on the image display.  You may have already
    done this at the conclusion of the blinking process.

    4)  Identify a clear sky background near the unknown.  Normally the
    software will use a border region around the unknown (see "Set "Box"
    Parameters").  If you respond "No" to the "Target Sky OK?" prompt,
    you will be asked to locate a star-free area for background
    readings.

When you have completed these steps, an astrometric solution will be
computed, and an Astrometric Solution Report will appear on the screen.
If you accept this solution you will be asked if you want to add this
result to the Astrometric Results Report.  Both the Astrometric Solution
Report and the Astrometric Results Report are described under separate
Help topics. You should also read the Help topic "Cursor Pointing
Accuracy" for information on the selection of stars on the reference and
image displays.

You may choose not to accept the solution, perhaps to change your
selection of reference stars to eliminate those with high residuals, or
to try a different mathematical solution model - see the following
paragraph for details.  If you accept the solution but do not
immediately add it to the Results report, you can do so later.  Select
"Astrometric Solution"->"Add to Report List" from the menu on the image
display window.

You can interrupt the measurement process at any time and return to any
previous step.  Simply press "Cancel" on the small control form box.
Another form box will appear from which you can select what you wish to
do next.  To terminate the entire measurement process, press "Cancel" on
the 2nd box.  If you select "Add/Delete Reference Stars" or "Select
Reference Stars", you can make changes to the reference field.  Press
the RIGHT mouse button with the cursor anywhere over the reference field
image to access the pop-up menu.  You can also change the solution model
at this time by selecting "Astrometric Solution" from the reference
window menu.

*Set "Box" Parameters*
To set the size of the regions around each star image involved in
centroiding and obtaining the sky background level, access the "Box"
Parameters form.  Press the RIGHT mouse button with the cursor over any
image or reference display, and select "Box Parameters".  (You can also
select "File"->"Preferences"->"Options and Parameters" from the main
menu and press the button labeled "Box".)  The form that appears enables
you to set the box width for the peak search, the diameter of the region
used for centroiding, and the width of the sky border.  See the Help
topic "Cursor Pointing Accuracy" for more information.

*Mathematical Solution Models*
The astrometric solution relates measured positions on the image (x,y)
to the so-called Standard Coordinates (X,Y), which are mathematically
linked to Right Ascension and Declination on the sky (see Section VI-3
of the Software Users' Guide for the CLEA exercise "Astrometry of
Asteroids").  The "Toolkit" offers a choice of three solution models, as
follows:

    1. The Linear Model
    This is the standard or "Six Constant" model described in many
    references on astrometry.  The equations defining this model are:

                    X = a*x + b*y + c
                    Y = d*x + e*y + d

    This model accounts for many instrumental errors, including
    displacement of the origin, rotation of the measurement coordinate
    system, non-perpendicularity of axes, and scale errors.  It does not
    remove errors caused by a tilt of the CCD with respect to the
    optical axis, sphericity of the focal surface, or coma.

    2. The Cross-Term Model
    This model adds a cross-term (x*y) to each equation.  The defining
    equations are then:

                X = a*x + b*y + c*x*y + d
                Y = e*x + f*y + g*x*y + h

    The cross-term model partially accounts for tilt errors. This is the
    model employed by Herbert Raab in "Astrometrica".

    3. The Full Quadratic Model
    This model includes all quadratic terms.  The defining equations
    become:

            X = a*x + b*y + c*x*y + d*x*x + e*y*y + f
            Y = g*x + h*y + i*x*y + j*x*x + k*y*y + l

    This model accounts for all the errors noted under (1) above.

In each case, a "solution" is the determination of the coefficients (the
so-called "Plate Constants") (a,b,c,...) by measuring (x,y) for standard
stars and computing (X,Y) from their known RA and Dec.  Since the
solutions for X and Y are handled separately, a solution for model (1)
requires a minimum of 3 standard stars, model (2) a minimum of 4, and
model (3) a minimum of 6.  In practice, two to three (or more) times the
minimum number should be used.  In this overdetermined case, the
coefficients are determined by least-squares techniques, and residuals
can be computed.

To change the solution model in use, select "File"->"Preferences"->
"Options and Parameters" from the main menu and make a selection under
"Astrometric Solution".  Alternatively, select "Astrometric Solution"
from the menu on the reference star display.  The solution model is
identified and the computed plate constants are shown on the Astrometric
Solution Report.

*Cursor Pointing Accuracy*
Although care should always be taken in positioning the cursor during
the measurement process, the software is designed to minimize the
effects of cursor positioning errors and ensure general repeatability of
results to the last significant figure.  This is accomplished through a
two-stage centroiding process that first searches the vicinity of the
cursor position for a peak in the data, and then uses that, rather than
the cursor position, as the point around which the mathematical
centroiding algorithm is applied.

Cursor positioning is generally adequate if the box that appears when
the mouse button is released is reasonably centered on the correct star
image.  (Centering may not appear exact due to non-symmetry of star
images, the "quantization" of the box positions to pixel addresses, and
other causes.  This will generally cause all selected stars in the image
to appear off-center by the same amount.)  It is usually best not to
select stars with nearby companions as reference stars.  If you must do
so, or the unknown itself is very near another image, be sure to verify
from the position of the encircling box that the correct selection has
been made.  In some cases it may be necessary to adjust the centroiding
parameters (see "Set "Box" Parameters").  Although the software attempts
to identify and eliminate "hot" pixels by averaging the surrounding
values, such an occurrence can affect the computed centroid by throwing
off the initial search for a nearby peak.

*Magnitudes*
Irregardless of the residuals and estimated errors stated on the
Astrometric Solution Report, magnitudes computed using the GSC are VERY
unreliable, to the point of being useful only as an indication of
differential variability of an object.  This is due primarily to
problems inherent to the magnitudes given in the GSC, which are not and
should not be considered photometric standards.  Among other problems,
the passbands are difficult to determine, and can vary from field to
field.

The situation with the USNO catalogs (A1.0/2.0,SA1.0/2.0) magnitudes is
marginally better, but the photometry "Read Me" file included with the
A1.0 catalog begins with the sentence:

    "The photometric calibration of the USNO-A1.0 is about as poor as
    one can have and still claim that the magnitudes mean something."

Although the photometric calibration for bright stars in the A2.0 was 
improved, the statement is made:

    "... the faint photometric calibration of the USNO-A2.0 may not be
    any better than for the USNO-A1.0."

In any event, we recommend that, if possible, only USNO catalog stars be
used as magnitude references; keeping the above statements in mind in
regards to results obtained.  The USNO catalog "red" magnitudes are
probably the best choice for use with unfiltered CCD images.

For more information on this topic see the Software User's Guide for the
CLEA exercise "Astrometry of Asteroids".

*Astrometric Solution Report*
An Astrometric Solution Report is displayed whenever a solution is
computed for an image.  Once a solution is available, the report can
also be accessed via "Solution Results..."->"View/Print" from the menu
on the image display window.

The Astrometric Solution Report gives the measured position, magnitude,
and estimated residuals for the target object, and the estimated error
(sigma) of the solution.  The measured position and residuals for each
reference star is also given, in order of decreasing position residual.
(You may be able to improve the solution by repeating it, eliminating
reference stars that show large residuals.)  Also shown are the computed
position of the field center, the "plate" constants, and the scale and
field dimensions.

The Astrometric Solution Report can be printed or saved as a text file,
if desired.  Make the appropriate selection under menu item "List".

*Astrometric Results Report*
The Astrometric Results Report is a list of measured positions and
magnitudes, along with the observation date and time, for each measured
object.  The list can be printed, saved as text, or saved in a format
that can be read by most spreadsheet software.  To access the report,
select "Report"->"View/Print/Save Text..." from the main menu.

*Compute Projected Baselines*
A feature of this software is the ability to compute projected baselines
between two Earth locations for minor planet parallax measurements.  The
following procedure outlines the technique:

    1. Select "Report"->"Compute Baseline..." from the main menu.

    2. Enter the observation time and position of the target object on
    the form that appears.  If you are computing the baseline for an
    observation that you have measured and recorded, press the button
    labeled "Obs. Data" and select the observation from the Astrometric
    Results Report that appears.  The data will automatically be
    transferred for you.

    3. Press the button labeled "Site 1" and enter the data for the
    first observation site.  If the site data has been saved, you can
    press the button labeled "File..." and then "Find Site...". If your
    site appears on the list, either double-click it, or select it and
    then select "Action"->"Access Selected Record" from the menu.  If
    you have to enter the site data by hand, you can save it for the
    future by selecting "File"->"Save Site Data".  When you have
    finished setting the Site 1 parameters press "OK".

    4. Repeat Step 3, pressing the button labeled "Site 2".

    5. Press "OK" on the baseline form.  The projected baseline will be
    computed and a report will appear.  The report can be printed or
    saved as text if desired.

*Using a Spreadsheet Program*
You may be able to access a spreadsheet program to analyze your data
directly from this exercise.  If the selection is enabled, select
"Report"->"Access Spreadsheet" from the main menu.  If you have recently
saved a file for use in the spreadsheet (see the Help topic "Astrometric
Results Report"), that file will be automatically loaded for you when
the spreadsheet program opens.  If you wish to load a file into the
spreadsheet yourself, remember that the file type is .CSV. You may find
this under the heading "Text Files" in the spreadsheet file load form.

*Close the Program*
To close the program, select "File"->"Exit" from the main menu, or use 
any of the standard Windows features (System Menu or "X" box) to close 
the main window.  You will be reminded of any unsaved data and given a 
chance to save it before the program terminates.

